+++
title = "Profiling and validation of circulating microRNAs for cardiovascular events in patients presenting with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction"
date = 2017-02-01
authors = ["P. Jakob", "**T. Kacprowski**", "*et al.*", "U. Landmesser"]
publication_types = ["2"]
abstract = "MicroRNAs (miRNA) are important non-coding modulators controlling patterns of gene expression. However, profiling and validation of circulating miRNA levels related to adverse cardiovascular outcome has not been performed in patients with an acute coronary syndrome (ACS). In a multicentre, prospective ACS cohort, 1002 out of 2168 patients presented with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). Sixty-three STEMI patients experienced an adjudicated major cardiovascular event (MACE, defined as cardiac death or recurrent myocardial infarction) within 1 year of follow-up. From a miRNA profiling in a matched derivation case-control cohort, 14 miRNAs were selected for validation. Comparing 63 cases vs. 126 controls, 3 miRNAs were significantly differentially abundant. In patients with MACE, miR-26b-5p levels (P = 0.038) were decreased, whereas miR-320a (P = 0.047) and miR-660-5p (P = 0.01) levels were increased. MiR-26b-5p has been suggested to prevent adverse cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, whereas miR-320a promotes cardiomyocyte death and apoptosis, and miR-660-5p has been related to active platelet production. This suggests that miR-26b-5p, miR-320a, and miR-660-5p may reflect alterations of different pathophysiological pathways involved in clinical outcome after ACS. Consistently, these three miRNAs reliably discriminated cases from controls [area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve (AUC) in age- and sex-adjusted Cox regression for miR-26b-5p = 0.707, miR-660-5p = 0.683, and miR-320a =0.672]. Combination of the three miRNAs further increased AUC to 0.718. Importantly, addition of the three miRNAs to both, the Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events (GRACE) score and a clinical model increased AUC from 0.679 to 0.720 and 0.722 to 0.732, respectively, with a net reclassification improvement of 0.20 in both cases. This is the first study performing profiling and validation of miRNAs that are associated with adverse cardiovascular outcome in patients with STEMI. MiR-26b-5p, miR-320a, and miR-660-5p discriminated for MACE and increased risk prediction when added to the GRACE score and a clinical model. These findings suggest that the release of specific miRNAs into circulation may reflect the activation of molecular pathways that impact on clinical outcome after STEMI."
selected = false
publication = "*Eur. Heart J.*"
doi = "10.1093/eurheartj/ehw563"
+++

